Session 220,
which is OpenGL Shading Language.
And we're pretty excited about
being able to have for Tiger the
OpenGL Shading Language available
to our developers because Apple's
extremely excited about the fact
that we have programmable hardware,
these fantastic GPUs that we
can do incredible things with,
many of which you've seen particularly
this year and even starting last year
with some of our demonstrations and also
sessions on programmability with GPUs.
The interesting thing is that previously,
working with these GPUs has been
basically almost a step back to
the past in terms of the way you
program these GPUs was often in sort
of like the assembly language level,
which isn't approachable
to a lot of developers.
So what's been happening in both
GPU development-- and that's
also been driving how these
functionalities are exposed to
the developers-- is the evolution
of higher level shading languages.
And that's exactly what
OpenGL Shading Language is.
And it's an approachable way
for developers experienced with
languages such as C to be able to
really look at leveraging the power
of the GPU in their application.
And it's also important for you
to realize that there's been some
confusion that we've had at this
WWDC because we've talked about
OpenGL Shading Language in two contexts.
One is obviously in its
relationship to Core Image,
where Core Image has sort of a subset of
OpenGL Shading Language that supports,
that enables you to do a lot of things.
So we've been working on that.
And we've been working
on that for a while now.
And we're going to do all the interesting
effects that Core Image supports.
But I also want to be clear that the
purpose of this session is to communicate
about the full OpenGL Shading Language,
which will be part of OpenGL in Tiger.
So that's going to give you all the
capabilities of the language and
that will expose all the capabilities
of current and future hardware,
GPU hardware that
supports programmability.
So on that note,
I'd like to actually invite our speaker,
James McComb,
to stage to take you through the session.
Thank you.
Good morning and thanks
for coming to this session.
I guess quite a lot of people make
it back from Cupertino last night,
but thanks for coming along.
Yeah, we're pretty excited about
this shading language stuff
that we've been working on.
I guess I want to sort of start
off with looking at where we were.
Two years ago,
we came here and hardware was coming
out that had a programmable vertex unit,
and we talked about our vertex program,
which was a language to allow, well,
reprogramming of the vertex unit.
And last year,
we talked about our fragment program,
which allowed you to reprogram
the sort of fragment lookup,
the per fragment lookup.
And some of the visual effects
that you can do with this really
are very powerful and incredible.
And increasingly, more and more,
your games are showing up and
various things are using this.
It's becoming clear that you
can do some very powerful
real-time effects with that.
However, those languages were
designed -- suddenly,
you know, we were handed with
this fancy new hardware.
We needed to come up with
a language to program it.
The languages that were created were
very -- quite close to the hardware.
They were assembly-like in nature.
Well, now we've had some time.
We've had some time in the
OpenGL community to sit down
and discuss a way to expose that
hardware and also future hardware
as new capabilities appear.
We want a language that can expose that,
be as portable as possible in the
sense that the same program can
run on various pieces of hardware.
Hardware supports new operations.
The language will expose that.
And we don't want to be revising
the language every year.
We want something that we can nail down.
And there's been a language now
for a very long time that's proven
itself to be very good at this,
and that's the C programming language.
For the general-purpose processor,
C got people away from programming
in assembly all the time.
And I guess the fact that we're
still programming in C today
is a good sign that it's a
pretty well-designed language.
So the OpenGL ARB got together and pretty
much took the C programming language
and added some slightly new stuff.
And it's got some slightly new
syntax to it that's required to,
I guess, make it appropriate for shading.
So let's take a look at
the support for this.
If you want to check in your
application if it's there,
these are the four extensions
that are going to be on an
OpenGL implementation that support this.
As I go through the presentation,
you'll see why really
there are four of them.
But the most important one
really to check for is the
one that's highlighted there,
ARB shading language.
If you check for that and that's there,
you should have at least some
level of support for the shading
language on your implementation.
Also, hardware support for this.
Really, any hardware that has support
for ARB fragment program
and ARB vertex program,
that hardware can support
the OpenGL program.
So the OpenGL shading language,
or at least varying amounts of it.
The shading language being C,
it has looping, branching,
function calls.
And also it has a lot of
built-in functions for generating
noise and various things.
Well, it turns out that a lot of
current hardware simply doesn't
have the actual machine code
instructions that will do that.
So there could be programs that
you'll submit that simply won't
run on the hardware at this time.
However,
this is a forward-thinking language.
And as hardware keeps coming out,
soon it will be fully supported.
But that leads me to my next point,
which is that current hardware resources,
they're limited either in terms of the
range of instructions that are available
or in terms of how many registers it has.
Therefore,
I want to talk about software rendering.
Now, here we are at the cutting
edge of technology.
There's fancy new hardware, and well,
we're back to software rendering again.
Well,
let's think about really why that is.
In the past, OpenGL really has sort of
been used mainly for sort of
non-photorealistic rendering.
It's been used for either previews in
an application like a CAD application.
It's been used as a preview,
but for the actual final rendering,
typically applications have had to
use their own software renderer.
Or in the movies,
people have used RenderMan and
various things for that.
Well, OpenGL is developing,
and now with these shading languages,
photorealistic rendering
is becoming a possibility.
So a software renderer becomes
necessary because we want
something that is high-precision,
has real 32-bit floats.
[Transcript missing]
Let's have a demo here of the software
renderer in action just to show
you sort of what we've got here.
So,
for any of you who were here last year,
you might recall this
particular image here.
This is actually just an arb vertex
and fragment program in ShaderBuilder.
This isn't even high-level shading
language I'm showing right now.
But this is really merely just to prove
the point of our software renderer.
Here you can see the
scene being rendered.
This is running on a
Radeon 9800 in hardware.
So it's obviously pretty quick here.
And if I can move the light around.
"Now if we click this button here,
you can see now we're
running in software.
This is a fragment program
Now yes, it's obviously slower,
but it's not bad.
So that's an example of our
software renderer right there.
So let's take another look at
another example of this in action.
Let's see here.
This is another one that if there's any
medical imaging folks in the audience,
they might find this
somewhat interesting.
[Transcript missing]
There's a program object,
and inside a program object you have
a vertex shader and a fragment shader.
The intent of a vertex shader is
that it generates a transformed
vertex with an untransformed
vertex and OpenGL state as inputs.
That's its goal.
It takes vertices that have been
submitted from your application
and performs some operation to
put them into window coordinates.
A fragment shader is similar,
except it's dealing with pixels.
It generates a pixel on the frame
buffer with the vertex attributes
interpolated across the scan line,
passed into it,
and also it has access to OpenGL state.
Obviously,
it can sample from the texture units.
Where do they fit in the pipeline?
So let's look at that.
You have your vertex data coming
from your application and then you
have the pixel data handed in through
your text image calls or whatever.
And also this can all obviously
come from display lists.
Normally the vertex data gets
through a fixed function gets
multiplied by a model view matrix,
it gets transformed and it gets
clipped by the clipping planes on
the sides of the screen or even user
clipping planes if you have any.
And also the vertex color gets
set by a very basic lighting
model that's built into OpenGL.
And then basically you end up with a
bunch of triangles and then it goes down
to the graphics driver or the software
renderer which takes those triangles and
breaks them up into sort of trapezoids
with a flat top and bottom and goes
through them scan line by scan line.
And basically stamps these
pixels into the frame buffer
and it's a very fixed operation.
If you've got multi-texturing turned on
it will pick a textile from one texture
unit then another and maybe modulate
them together or something like that.
Well, the programmability part comes in
whenever you start to pull those out,
and you're going to then have
the ability to replace these
two parts of the pipeline.
That's what you're doing, essentially.
So, take a look at some terminology here.
A primitive is really a series of
vertices with a connection rule.
So, in a sense,
if you're in immediate mode,
everything between your GL begin and end,
in the begin call,
you specify the connection rule,
and everything in between
that is your vertices,
and you can specify
vertex attributes there,
too.
Shaders are applied on
a per-primitive basis.
You can't switch shader
halfway through a primitive.
So it's important to note that the shader
remains sort of constant throughout that.
Also, OpenGL state, it can only change on
a per-primitive basis.
You know, you can only enable or disable
something outside of a begin-end.
So that's going to be -- the state
is going to be uniform throughout
the execution of that shader.
And that term uniform is
important because it's actually
going to be a keyword in this
-- in this shading language.
And I'm just trying to
explain where they come from.
Also, looking at a vertex,
obviously it's a 3D point
comprising a primitive.
The vertex shaders are
ran once for every vertex.
Now, in hardware they could
be ran in parallel,
but still there's one execution
for every one of those vertices.
They're independent from one another for
that -- for the purpose of parallelism.
So therefore,
you cannot have communication between
subsequent executions of a shader.
They're discrete from one another.
Also, vertices, they have attributes
associated with them.
You know, mainly their position,
the color, they could have a normal
texture coordinates,
and a bunch of other user-defined
attributes that you might want,
weights or whatever
else you might be using.
And then a fragment is really
-- it's a pixel on your frame
buffer that comprises a scanline
during the triangle rasterization.
So, that's the first thing.
The Fragment Shader determines its color.
The Fragment Shader has
access to data that's varying
coming from the Vertex Shader,
and it's varying because for every
execution of that Fragment Shader,
those attributes are interpolated
across that scan line.
So let's take a look at the current
languages that are available today.
The ARB approved languages are
Vertex and Fragment Program.
Again, as I said, they're assembly-like,
except they've no bitwise operations.
They're all kind of
high-level instructions,
somewhat high-level,
mainly sort of mathematical operations.
They all deal in floating point,
and it's a SIMD instruction set.
An ADD is going to do an ADD on
four components in a register.
All the registers are four components.
And also the instructions
are a fairly close mapping
of the hardware instructions,
which is actually the very thing that
we are trying to get away from now.
And the language has enforced
resource limitations,
which can be annoying,
but the upside of that,
the good side of enforced resource
limitations is that you know if it's
going to run on hardware or not.
You know that.
You can query it,
and as long as your program is
within those well-defined bounds,
it will run on the graphics hardware.
This is just a look at the hardware.
So this is the instruction
set that was available.
I broke it into four sections.
This is the ARB fragment
program instruction set.
You can see, you know,
assembly-like names.
This is an example of
an ARB vertex program,
a very simple one that merely
transforms a vertex and moves
the texture coordinate through.
Pretty straightforward.
And this is a fragment program
that basically samples a text line.
So this is a sample of a texel from
texture unit 0 and texture unit 1,
and then it multiplies them together
and writes it to the output fragment.
That's what those languages
look like at this point.
Pretty straightforward.
But it can get pretty complicated
if you want to express large
programs and complex effects.
So let's take a look at the high-level
shading language at this point.
Why do you want to use this?
Potentially less code to write.
You can express it in terms
that you're more familiar with.
I'm sure some of you are familiar
with writing assembly code,
but no matter what,
you're really only writing
it in your inner loops.
You're not writing it
every day with your code,
so being able to write
in C could be convenient.
You no longer need to deal with
specific registers anymore.
That's all virtualized.
Just declare variables and
use them as you please.
You can depend on the compiler to some
extent to take care of that for you.
Also is the goal of
hardware independence.
This language doesn't tie itself
to any one piece of hardware,
which I think is a good
thing in the long run.
And also is the nice intent of
being able to have code reuse.
The ability to have function calls and
also to be able to draw in multiple files
comprising one shader is very useful.
You could have like a file,
like a library almost full of like useful
chunks of shader code that you use,
and you can function call into
that from the shading language.
So that code reuse is pretty nice.
Here's just a comparison of sort of what
the two things look like side by side.
You can see there's the arb vertex
program that transforms a vertex
and passes its color through.
And then you can see the GL shading
language version of the same thing.
It's a more natural form
of expressing it really.
It just looks like C really.
It has a main entry point and so forth.
So,
The object model here,
the way the API kind of works is
And to make a vertex shader
object you basically need,
you can have one or more strings,
which are the strings of the C code
that you basically want to put in.
And there can be more than
one of these strings and
they're concatenated together.
And you can function
call in between them.
So you need a vertex shader object,
and then also it's the exact same
thing except for the fragment shader.
When you have these two objects created,
you basically pass each of
those through a compile stage,
which compiles it down
to the machine code,
which then gets passed into a linker.
This is a linker that builds
a final program object.
That is what you then use that program
object and start drawing primitives and
the shader will be applied to those.
The language is C-inspired.
It's got the usual main entry point.
The language supports looping
and branching and all those other
things just like you'd expect.
There are no pointers.
Since really you're not
accessing memory directly,
there's no real concept of
accessing memory in this,
the idea of having pointers doesn't
really make sense in this language.
So that syntax you will not see.
There are new data types since the
hardware registers are all vectors.
There are new data types to support that.
And also there's a
matrix data type as well.
Since we're introducing
vector data types,
what happens if you want to
pick a scalar out of that?
You want to get access to a
scalar or you want to reorder the
scalar components in a vector.
Well,
there's new syntax for swizzling now.
We can pick out a certain
component or reorder them.
There are new qualifiers.
You know, you've got the C program for a
vertex shader and then you have a
C program for a fragment shader.
They're separate.
How do you get communication
in between them?
Well,
the way that's done is via declaring a
variable with a particular qualifier in
both programs and having the names match.
That's what the linker stage does
is it ties up those loose ends.
And then we have a,
there are a bunch of intrinsic variables,
just predefined variables that are there,
and either they allow you to access
OpenGL state or you write your value
into these predefined variables.
So let's take a look at the qualifiers,
the type qualifiers that exist.
The first stage is an attribute.
Inside your vertex shader,
to access the vertex attributes,
you basically just declare something
with the attribute qualifier.
They only make sense to be
declared in a vertex shader.
And attributes,
they change at most once per vertex.
And they're read-only.
You can't write to them.
The variables that are declared
with the uniform qualifier,
basically those are things that
are set outside the shader,
and they're uniform throughout
execution of that shader.
So they're read-only,
and their frequency of change
is at most once per primitive,
things like the OpenGL state.
And even in fragment programming,
the texture data is
considered uniform as well.
The other thing, just like C,
you've obviously got a const,
which is just inline constants that
you want to declare in your program,
obviously read-only.
If you don't put a qualifier in,
you're just declaring, really,
a temporary variable,
just for scratch space.
And it's important to note,
like I said earlier,
the data in those will not persist
between executions of the shader.
You can't write something into a temp
and expect it to be there on the next,
when it processes the next vertex.
That isn't going to happen.
They are read-write access.
And then there's the qualifier varying.
Basically,
variables declared with a varying
type are basically your pipeline
of communication between the vertex
shader and the fragment shader.
Declare something as varying,
the rasterizer is going to take
that value from the vertex shader
and it's going to interpolate it,
and the fragment program
will get that value as it's
interpolated across the scanline.
So...
Let's take a look at some
of these new data types.
You basically have three
main classes of data type.
You have floating point types,
there's an integer type,
and there's even a Boolean type.
Now, you can't expect that that
integer is actually going to be
stored in a fixed-width register,
so there's still no shifting
or bitwise operations,
but the type still exists because some
of the functions expect it to be there.
Also, these are the vector types,
and there can be two-component,
three-component,
and four-component vectors.
And again, use swizzling to pick
out scalar components.
Also, they can be accessed
as a zero-based array.
So if you have a vector and
you want the second scalar,
you could do, you know, variable,
open the square bracket,
and actually pick it out like that.
So it's the two ways to access it.
Obviously, there are scalar types now.
If you declare something as a float,
it's just going to have
one scalar in there.
And of course the flow control
constructs in this language,
they will only accept a
Boolean type to branch on.
There's also a bunch of matrix types.
You'll probably want to use these
for getting the transformation matrix
from OpenGL and store stuff in there,
or you might have your own matrices
within your application that you
want to pass in as parameters.
Stored column major,
which is compatible with the
way the rest of OpenGL works.
And again, you can access these as an
array of column vectors.
If you take a matrix and, I guess,
take the first element of that,
that will return a vector type.
And then with that vector,
you could access the first
element and get a scalar.
That's how it'll work.
The last data type is a sampler.
Basically, it's a handle to
encapsulate a texture unit.
There are function calls in
this language for getting out
a text from a texture unit,
and a sampler
You need to pass that in as the
first argument and then outside
of the shader in your application,
you then sort of attach a
texture unit to a sampler.
That's how they work.
It's just a handle.
And again,
they're always declared with a uniform
qualifier because texture units don't
change between executions of the shader
or during execution of the shader.
Data from these is of course read-only.
So here is another sort of deviation
from the C programming language.
Because we now have, I guess,
aggregate data types in a sense,
basically things that are non-scalar,
we need these constructors.
Not so much constructors
in the C++ sense,
but it's probably
perhaps similar in idea.
Anyhow, they're used to initialize
an aggregate type.
And of course in C you had this concept
you could just declare a variable
v= and then you could open braces
and fill in each of the components.
What a constructor is,
is basically when you declare a variable,
if you want to assign something,
if you want to put something into it,
you basically make a function call
which is the same as the type,
as the name of the type.
And then in those brackets
you fill in the values.
That's how it works.
So I've shown you a couple
of examples of that.
You can see there.
I'm declaring a four
component vector type.
I then have to call a function
vec4 with four scalars
inside of that to fill it in.
And then you can see the similar
example filling in an actual structure.
You make a call which is the same name as
the structure and you pass in the values
and you can see how they actually nest.
These constructors nest.
That's one thing that's
a little different that
you'll need to get used to,
but it's not hard to figure out.
In terms of the operators you have,
there's nothing really new here.
The only thing that you'll see
missing is the bitwise operations.
There's the logical and
and or and so forth,
but not the bitwise.
So, swizzling, just to give an example
of how that works,
you can see here I declare v0 and
construct it with four scalers.
And you can see then,
I'm assigning v0 to v1,
but v0 has a swizzle on it.
And you can see what
that's actually doing.
It's actually reordered the components
within the scalers within that.
These swizzles, they can either be x, y,
z, w.
They have, I guess,
they have convenient names.
x, y, z, w you would probably use
if it's positional data.
RGBA if it's color space data.
And there's even an strq if it's
used for storing texture units.
You can use them interchangeably,
but to make your code more readable,
you might want to take advantage of that.
Also, as a result of a swizzle,
you can actually change the data type.
You can see that when
I'm assigning V0 to V3,
V3 is only a VEC2,
so it has only two components.
So you're going to need to
pick the two components that
you're going to assign to that,
which is why I'm picking Q and S.
And also you can see that type
conversion can be used to just
produce one single scalar.
In terms of the operators, in a sense,
they're overloaded in the sense
that depending on the type
that they're working with,
they'll have a different behavior.
No, it's not.
Don't get too scared of that.
It's pretty simple, the behavior,
actually.
For all the operations,
apart from the multiply,
the behavior is very obvious.
It simply applies.
If you do an add A equals B plus C,
it's going to perform that add
for all the scalers within that.
If it's a vector,
it's going to do four adds.
If it's a matrix,
it's going to do 16 of them.
The reason multiply is a
little different is that if you
multiply a vector times a matrix,
it does a linear algebraic
multiply where it's actually
going to be four dot products.
That's what it's actually
going to break down into,
which is really convenient because at
the beginning of your vertex programs,
you're always having to do these four
dot products to transform your vertex.
Well, now it's just a one-liner.
Position equals vertex
times model view matrix.
It's pretty convenient.
Matrix times matrix also works that way.
I talked about these
predefined variables.
You can see that we have predefined ones,
one for the vertex color, normal,
and access to the texture units.
Varying types to communicate
from vertex to fragment.
Again,
texture coordinates in the front color.
And outputs in the fragment shader.
When you write your final
color into GLFragColor,
and that's what will get
written to the frame buffer.
And then there's a bunch of uniforms that
are declared in your model view matrix,
and access to the lighting
information from the GL state.
So, let's take a look at,
we've talked a little
about the language here.
Let's look at how to,
I've shown you the program strings,
how do you actually load these
into your GL and actually make
use of them in your application.
Well, the first thing you want to do
is acquire the program strings,
load them from a file,
do whatever you need to do,
but load them into two strings.
We've got a type declared for that,
GLCharR pointer.
Load them in,
and then you want to actually
put them in an array of strings,
and the reason for that is what I said,
you can actually have multiple
strings that comprise a shader
with function calls between them.
So in this case, I just have one string.
So I'm obviously setting the
array size to be just one,
but that could be any number.
The second step,
you need to declare three handles,
one for the vertex shader object,
one for the fragment shader object,
and then one for the final
program object that these are
both going to be attached to.
So you have those declared and then
other two variables that are useful
is basically a status variable and
also the length of a log because when
you perform compiles and links you're
actually going to get information
back from the compiler that you might
want to check or if there's errors
you're going to want to see them.
So yes,
there's now a log that comes back.
Your next stage,
let's create the vertex shader object.
You can see from the code
I've got here how to do it.
It's not very hard.
You basically create shader
object and you tell it,
you know, it's a vertex shader.
GL shader source arb allows me
basically to attach the string to that.
Compile shader arb will
actually perform the,
will start the compiler going,
generating the machine code for this.
And at that point,
you want to get back the status of the
compile to see if it succeeded or not.
And also you want to get back
the length of an info log.
And you need that length because
you'll need to allocate some
memory to store your log into.
So, you will repeat that step
for the fragment shader.
It's exactly the same thing
except with vertex pretty much
replaced with the word fragment.
So, you're going to end up with these
vertex and fragment shader objects.
At that point,
you create a program object,
you attach the vertex and
fragment shader to that,
and then you call link program.
And that's basically going to tie up
varying variables that you declared
in the vertex and fragment shader.
It does a name match on those
and connects them together.
And the linker,
you also need to check for errors
as well because the link stage,
like C programming can feel,
and you need to check that.
So,
assuming that that all succeeded and you
have your program object ready to go,
if you're ready to start drawing
geometry with that program object,
you make a call to useProgramObject,
and then you just put it in there
and it will start to draw with that.
Unlike our vertex and fragment program,
there's no glEnableDisable.
You don't enable and disable it.
Rather, you use a program object,
and then if you want
to turn off the shader,
you call it with null,
and that will switch you
back to the fixed function.
pipeline.
So I mentioned that
inside these languages,
you can declare variables
with a uniform type.
They basically are your way of
passing parameters into your program.
For those familiar with our
vertex and fragment program,
these environment parameters
and local parameters,
well, they're all environment
parameters at this point,
and this is how you set them.
You basically,
there's two calls required.
The first one is, you need to get, like,
an index back,
which is the position of that uniform,
and the thing you pass in is the actual
string that you declared in your program.
It gives you an index back,
and then you make a call to GL uniform,
and there's several variants of that for,
you know, passing in an array or some
immediate inline floating point
values to pass in your uniform data.
The same thing is true
for vertex attributes.
You basically get the name.
You get an index from the
name of the attribute,
and you just set the values.
Um, to take a look at, uh,
there are a bunch of built-in
functions that are really nice.
There's a kind of a library of
functions that come along with this.
Um, I would encourage you to,
if you're interested in this,
in this language, to go and get the,
the official, the orange book on the
shader language because the,
the, the range of these functions is, is,
is too much really for
me to go through today.
Um,
but you should look through them because
there are a lot of very interesting ones.
Some of the ones that I,
I've been finding quite interesting
are the noise generation functions,
um, which are really good
for image processing.
Uh, basically random number generators,
but there's a,
there's a lot of variations in them.
Um, there's other things like, you know,
like a, a, like a,
a mix function for doing a linear
interpolation between two values,
which is convenient.
And, uh, also the, uh, the, the,
the texture access functions.
Um, and actually I want to take a look
at some of those because those I,
I,
I feel are probably the most important.
Um, one thing that's really pretty nice
about this language is we've always
thought of texture access being available
in fragment programs because obviously
you want to texture map your surface.
Well, the shading language allows
you to do texture sampling
in vertex programs as well.
This has some pretty powerful, um,
side effects.
You can imagine passing just a,
a bunch of vertices into OpenGL and
in the vertex program displacing
them based on a texture map,
suddenly, you know,
you could have a live video
stream going into your GL,
have a bunch of vertices and have like,
you know, like the, the three,
like a 3D face almost showing up.
Um, there, there's a lot of,
a lot of possibilities there.
Um, or,
or you could even just store generic
vertex data in your texture units.
It's, it's kind of, kind of mind bending,
but the things you can do there are, are,
are, are large.
Um, in terms of, uh, of texture access,
basically it's just a function call
and you pass in a texture coordinate,
a sampler,
and basically it gives you back, um,
a four component value which is
the RGBA value at that point.
Um, the, really the,
the functionality here is,
is the same as our fragment program.
Like, obviously with the addition that
you can do it in the vertex program.
Um, it does add support for depth
textures where it can get a text on,
automatically do a comparison
against a depth buffer,
which is useful for shadowing effects.
Um, so now actually I, I would like to,
uh, switch over to show you a
bit of a demonstration here.
Now, it's important to note that this
is really the bleeding edge here.
Um, so it's not done yet,
but I want to give you an,
an example of sort of to show you
how far along we are with this.
Um, so hopefully things will
go according to plan here.
So I went ahead and did a little
work here to get this integrated
into Shader Builder so that
I could show you what we have.
Let me first show you,
just typing this in.
I'm going to make the font here
a little bigger so that you
can see a little more clearly.
So let's go to the fragment program
here and write a simple one.
Just declaring my main
function right here.
And then basically in
my fragment program,
I'm merely going to pass through the
interpolated color data coming from
the vertex shader to the output.
So,
This is the predefined
variable GL_FragColor.
And you can see as I'm typing here,
again, as is common in ShaderBuilder,
it'll do the real-time
sign text checking.
And even though this is C,
we're still able to do that,
which is kind of nice.
So that's the fragment shader done.
That's a very simple one.
And then in the vertex shader,
let's pick OpenGL's shading language.
Let's try that again.
Let me just show you what I've got here.
As I said, this is very recent code.
Here you can see the high-level
shading language being used to express
a pretty simple lighting model.
It's just done in the vertex program,
in the vertex shader space.
The fragment shader is merely
passing through the color.
Let me make the code a little bigger.
Hopefully everyone's
able to see that okay.
But you can see the kind
of stuff we're doing.
This is common in C, you know,
basically able to nest
brackets and so forth.
Basically you can express these
things in a lot less lines of code.
If I want,
you can see on this line I declare F1,
and here I use it again.
Well, I can go ahead and, like,
move it inside.
"Delete that line.
So it's... We're getting there.
We're not done yet.
But this feature is slated for Tiger.
But we really want to get
it to you as fast as we can.
So we're doing our best.
It's a difficult spec to implement.
So we'll keep you posted on that.
So I guess I want to
wrap up at this point.
I hope you enjoyed hearing
about this at least.
And I hope that when
it becomes available,
you'll start to use it.
And yeah, I guess at this point,
I'd like to invite Travis up if... I'm
sure there'll be a lot of questions.